Corelli, Arcangelo, admirable violinist and composer ; born Fusignano, n. Imola, Italy, in Feb., 1653 ; d. Rome, Jan. 13, 1713. His violin teacher was G. B. Bassani ; counterpoint he learned with Matteo Simonelli. Little is known of his life until 1681, when, after travelling in Germany and holding a position in Munich, he settled in Rome under the patronage of Cardinal Pietro Ottoboni, in whose house he lived. His talents, combined with a winning, personality, made him a favorite in the highest social circles of Rome ; his concerts in the cardinal's palace were considered the chief musical events of the day. In 1683 his op. I was published. As a teacher his fame grew apace ; pupils flocked to him from all sides, among them Battista Anet, Geminiani, Locatelli, and G. and L. Somis. The King of Naples made repeated overtures to C. to enter his service : at length, yielding to his solicitations, C. went to Naples, and gave a very successful concert before the court ; but his second attempt failed to please the king, he himself made some awkward slips, and soon thereafter returned to Rome covered with mortification. Here a mediocre violinist, Valentini, had been well received by the public meantime ; and Corelli, imagining himself supplanted and neglected, went into a decline, and died "aged 59 years, 10 months, and 20.days." He was buried in the Church of Santa Maria della Rotonda ; his statue is in the Vatican.—C.'s merit was twofold ; understanding the character of his instrument, he laid the foundation of good violin-technique : to him are attributed the systematization of the science of bowing and the regulation of the shifts and the introduction of chord-playing. His compositions are still regarded as classics. His greatest effort was the " Concerti grossi," which appeared only six weeks before his death. Of the works pubi, under Corelli's name, all but the following six, which are given under their original titles, are probably spurious : "12 Suonate a tre, due violini e violoncello, col basso per l'organo. Op. 1, Roma, 1683" ; " 12 Suonate da camera a tre, due violini, violoncello, e violone o cembalo. Op. 2, Roma, 1685"; "12 Suonate a tre, due violini e arciliuto col basso per l'organo. Op. 3, Bologna, 1690"; "12 Suonate da camera a tre, due violini e violone o cembalo. Op. 4, Bologna, 1694" (in Amsterdam as "Ballettida camera"); "12 Suonate a violono e violone o cembalo. Op. 5, Roma, 1700 " (later arr. by Geminiani as "Concerti grossi"); "Concerti grossi con due violini e violoncello di concertino obbligato, e due altri violini, viola e basso di concerto grosso ad arbitrio, che si possono raddoppiare. Op. 6, Roma, 1712." All these were variously reprinted at the time, more recent editions are by Pepusch (Walsh : London ; op. 1—4, and op. 6) ; by Joachim (in Chrysander's " Denkmäler"; op. 1 and 2), and by Alard and David (some numbers from op. 5).
