Purcell, Henry (called " the younger," because the son of Henry P., Gentleman of the Chapel Royal, and Master of the Choristers at Westminster Abbey), b. in St. Ann's Lane, Old Pye St., Westminster, London, in 1658 ; d. Dean's Yard, Westminster, Nov. 21, i6gs. From 1664, the year of his father's death, he studied as a chorister of ^he Chapel Royal under Cooke and Humfrey, also receiving instruction from Dr. Blow. As early as 1676 he wrote the music for Dryden's tragedy Aurenge-Zebe, and Shadwell's comedy Epsom Wells ; he also pubi, a song in Playford's "Choice Ayres, etc.," Book i. In 1677 he wrote the overture, act-tunes, etc., to Mrs. Behn's tragedy Abdelazor, and an elegy on Matthew Locke (in Book ii of " Choice Ayres "). Next year he composed the overture, instr.l music, and the masque, in Shadwell's version of Timon of Athens ; to 1680 belong the incid. music to Lee's tragedy The-odosius and D'Ur-fey's comedy The Virtuous Wife, and a little opera, Dido and jEneas, written tu the order of Josias Priest for his ' ' boarding-school for young gentlewomen"; also the "Ode or Welcome Song for his Royal Highness " the Duke of York, and "A Song to welcome home His Majesty from Windsor." Appointed organist at Westminster Abbey, he wrote no more theatrical music for six years, presumably turning his attention to church-music. In 1682 he became organist of the Chapel Royal as Lowe's successor ; in 1683, composer-in-ordinary to the King. His first pubi, chamber-music dates from 1683, " Sonatas of III parts, two Viollins and Basse to the Organ or Harpsichord " (with engraved portrait), 12 numbers, based on Italian models, each having an Adagio, a Canzone (fugue), a slow movem., and an air (3 recently reprinted by Augener). More "Odes" appeared at this time ; the last one to King Charles in 1684, and the greeting to King James in 1685 ; in all, P. wrote 28 of these. Dramatic composition recommenced in 1686, with Dryden's Tyrannic Love; D'Urfey's A Fool's Preferment followed in 1688, and Shadwell's version of The Tempest in 1690.. " The Yorkshire Feast Song," called by D'Urfey, the author, " one of the finest compositions he ever made," was composed and produced in 1690 ; also his first real opera, Diocle-sian. During the next five years he developed extraordinary activity in theatrical composition, as the list below proves. It is probable that he died after a lingering illness (consumption) ; he lies in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey, and his burial-tablet well expresses contemporary estimation of his worth : " Here lyes Henry Purcell, Esq. ; who left this life, and is gone to that blessed place where only his harmony can be exceeded." His church-music shows the original melodist, and a master of form, harmony, ajid all contrapuntal devices ; his dramatic music is equally original in invention, dramatic instinct, and power of characterization ; his chamber-works surpass those of his predecessors and contemporaries. "We see in him the improver of our cathedral music ; the originator of English melody, as the term is now understood ; the establisher of a form of English opera which was almost universally adopted for upwards of a century and a half ; the introducer of a new and more effective employment of the orchestra in •accompaniment ; the man who excelled all others in his accurate, vigorous, and energetic setting of English words ; and the most original and extraordinary musical genius that our country has produced." [Grove.] His stage-music is as dramatic as and more melodious than that of his model, Lully ; his sacred compositions were eagerly and profitably studied by Händel. —The "Purcell Society," organized in 1876 to publish and perform his works, has issued the 12 sonatas, The Yorkshire Feast Song, Timon of A thens, and the Birthday Ode to the Duke of Gloucester. Other pubi, works : The Prophetess, or the History of Dioclesian, by Betterton, after Beaumont and Fletcher (in score, 1891); Dido and ALneas, by Nahum Tate [1675] (in score, 1840, by the Mus. Antiq. Soc.) ; King Arthur [1691], by Dryden (in score, 1843, by the Mus. Ant. Soc.) ; Bonduca [1695], by Powell, after Beaumont and Fletcher (in score, by ditto) ; his widow pubi, in 1697 "A Collection of Ayres Composed for the Theatre and upon other Occasions " ; also' songs for 1-3 voices, from his theatrical works and odes ; and the ' ' Orpheus Britannicus " in 2 parts (Parti, 1698, 2nd ed. 1706 ; Part ii, 1702, 2nd ed. 1711 ; 3d ed., of both parts, 1721). Playford's " Theatre of Musick " (1687), and the coll.s of Boyce, Arnold, Tudway, and Page, contain many of P.'s works ; many sacred songs were printed in the " Harmonia sacra " (1688) ; Novello's "Purcell's Sacred Music " contains a Te Deum and Jubilate (for St. Cecilia's Day), 3 services, 20 anthems w. orch., 32 do. w. organ, 19 songs (some w. chorus), 2 duets, one terzet, 11 hymns a 3-4, 2 Latin Psalms, and 5 canons (1829-32 ; six vol.s, with portrait and biography) ;
